---
layout: lab
title: Password Lab
subtitle: Breaking into things, for great good
summary: |
  This assignment has us reverse engineer some
  programs and find the appropriate passwords.
date: 2020-03-29 21:04:31 +0200
released: 12:00 AM Monday, March 30th, 2020.
due: 11:59 PM Friday, April 10th, 2020.
---

**Weight**: 10% of your total 50% Lab Grade

**Note**: You, again, want to get a head start on this!

## Introduction

For this assignment, you will be given a set of executables without the source
code. Each executable expects a line of input to be given and it will tell you
whether or not the input is the expected password.

You will use the tools we have discussed throughout the course, and perhaps
some new tricks, to determine how the executables work. With that knowledge, you
can then determine the password and use it to unlock the executable.

For this assignment, we will only expect you to do the first three out of the
total five executables. They begin with your username and end with a number
indicating which of the five they are.

The difficulty for each executable is roughly understood by the number appended
to it. `<user>_1` is constructed in a simple way, relative to the others. Yet,
`<user>_5` has had some processing done on it to obstruct the normal process a
bit. Yet, the difficulty comes down to your own capability with the tools.

If you are new to these tools and have not been using them on your other
assignments, starting early is wise.

## Downloading / Usage

To get your executables, on thoth, create a directory and navigate to it. Then,
use the following command on thoth:

```
cp /u/SysLab/$USER/* .
```

This will copy the executables to your own space. Now, you can run each of them
and do whatever you think of to learn how they work.

For instance, given my username is `abc3`:

```
./abc3_1

```

It will hang because it expects you to type in the password. Since I do not know
what it is, I will type in some garbage. (If it still hangs after pressing enter
it is expecting a longer string. This is a good hint to the expected password
length.)

```
./abc3_1
asdfjasdflasdfhjkasd
Sorry! Not correct!
```

Ah, dang. I wasn't very lucky! The expected strings have been generated at
random, so you are not likely to be able to determine them from brute force.

Yet, after looking at the executable with the tools available, I can discover
the appropriate password.

```
./abc3_1
WDgTPwrlnAOOhsYCbbKEsIeUqksfLG
Congratulations!
Unlocked with passphrase WDgTPwrlnAOOhsYCbbKEsIeUqksfLG
```

Often the passwords will be nonsense strings of characters and symbols. There
may be more than one possible password, but you only need to come up with a
single working password.

The more difficult programs may involve randomness of
some kind during the runtime of the program, so the password may change slightly
from one run to the next after a small window of time. For these, you will have
to include all possible passwords, of which there will be a short list. This
is not the case for any of the first three programs.

## Implementation

You aren't writing any code! Take a break from writing code (unless you want to
write some helpful scripts for yourself.) This is about reading.

## Helpful Tools

For this assignment, you will look toward using a set of useful debugging and
exploratory tools. These are all useful, in general, for reverse engineering
work.

### strings

The first tool is a simple one. The `strings` command, when given any data file,
which includes executables, it will print out every ASCII-encoded string it can
find. It simply looks for uninterrupted patterns of valid printable characters
and prints out each one that is of a certain length.

```
$ strings ./abc3_1
PTRhP
<[^_]
<8#}
L[^_]
,[^_]
[^_]
[^_]
[^_]
fffff.
[^_]
tr;E
...
```

You'll find that there are a LOT of strings... you may want to just save the
output to a file and open that up in a text editor.

```
$ strings ./abc3_1 > strings_1.txt
```

One strategy is to look for strings you know something about already. Often
useful strings are near well-known strings.

### objdump

The next great tool is `objdump` which can disassemble executables. Again, we
just specify the executable and some flags and it will print the output to the
screen. Again, we should probably redirect the output to a text file.

```
$ objdump -d ./abc3_1 > asm_1.asm
```

The `-d` flag disassembles the `.text` section of this ELF executable. You can
explore other flags by running `objdump -h` to see a listing of them.

The output of `objdump`, here, will be the assembly dump. It shows several
columns which we looked at in lecture. The left-hand column is the instruction
address, which will be useful for `gdb`. The middle column is the machine code
represented in hexadecimal octets. The right-hand column is the assembly code.

You will see the names of functions in the form `080482cf <main>:` where the
left-hand side is the address of that function and the part within the brackets
is the name. For some of the most difficult executables, the names are not
available. For most of the executables, the names are not that meaningful.

### gdb

The final tool is `gdb`, which we have explored in lecture and recitation
worksheets. This is a traditional debugger which allows you to pause and resume
execution of a program while examining memory and register state as you go.

With `gdb`, and with the other tools, you should be able to find a reasonable
place to start looking. Please look at the gdb worksheet for a good beginner's
tutorial on using `gdb` to reverse engineer an executable.

To use `gdb`, you simply invoke it with the executable as an argument.

```
$ gdb ./abc3_1
```

Then you follow the example set in the worksheet on how to proceed.

## Your turn

For each of the first three executables, that is the ones ending in `_1`, `_2`,
and `_3`, determine the password necessary to unlock. There may be more than one
correct answer. You will only need to provide a single correct password to
Gradescope for each program.

For some small extra credit, there will be an option to submit the answers to
the `_4` and `_5` programs that will be open throughout the remainder of the
semester. **Note**: Only the first three programs are due by the given due date.

## Submission

You will submit the passwords to gradescope using plain text files named `pw1`,
`pw2` and `pw3` to Gradescope. Each text file will contain just the password you
want to use and nothing else.

When the submission window is open for passwords 4 and 5 (extra credit), those
will work the same way using `pw4` and `pw5` in a separate Gradescope "assignment."

The autograder will attempt to use every line of your text file as a password. So,
if the password is arbitrary, you can specify every possible password and it will
use the correct one. (This is a hint to the extra credit submission, mostly.)

**Note**: This means that your password cannot span multiple lines! It will not
accept it, even if the password technically works on thoth.
